.
.
.Dd January 10, 2006
.Os X "Version 11"
.Dt xnots 1
.
.
.Sh NAME
.
.
.Nm xnots
.Nd A desktop sticky note program for Unix geeks.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl q
.Op Ar dir Op Ar file
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
.
.Bd -filled
.Nm
is a desktop sticky note system for the X window system and unix geeks.
.Nm
is designed so that all your sticky notes and to-do lists are text files in a certain directory (by default
.Pa ~/.xnots ) .
The idea is that any unix geek should abhor typing text into anything EXCEPT his favourite editor. These files completely control the appearance and content of the displayed sticky notes, and thus the average unix geek will never have to use the mouse or (god forbid) navigate using menus to control
.Nm .
.
.Pp
.
On startup
.Nm
first reads options from the file
.Pa ~/.xnotsrc ,
or the file
.Ar file
supplied on the command line. Then
.Nm
reads the file
.Pa .xnotsinfo
in the directory
.Pa ~/.xnots
(or the directory
.Ar dir
supplied on the command line). This file contains the position / sizes of sticky notes saved from previous sessions. Finally,
.Nm
displays all files found in the directory
.Pa ~/.xnots
(or the directory
.Ar dir
supplied on the command line) as sticky notes.
.Pp
.
.Nm
then watches this directory for changes so that changes made to files in this directory are immediately reflected in the displayed sticky notes. To create new notes, simply create a file in this directory. To delete notes, either use your window manager to close them, or delete the corresponding note file. And to modify the content or appearance of an existing note, simply edit the corresponding text file with your favourite text editor.
.Pp
If you move / resize any sticky note,
.Nm
will periodically save this information in the file
.Pa .xnotsinfo ,
so that the notes can be restored to the same positions the next time
.Nm
is started. This file can safely be edited (or removed) by the user when
.Nm
is not running (if
.Nm
is running, then your changes might be lost when it exits). Finally,
.Nm
will exit only when the watched directory is deleted / moved, or it receives a TERM signal (e.g. via
.Sq pkill -n xnots ) .
.Pp
.
.Sy NOTE:
Files in the watched directory beginning with a period, or ending with
.Sq ~
or
.Sq .swp
are ignored.
.Ed
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.
.Bd -filled
.Bl -tag -width 4n
.It Fl q
Do not display anything on stdout (except for X errors).
.
.It Ar dir
Directory to look for note files in (default
.Pa ~/xnots ) .
This must be the first argument (except possibly for the
.Fl q
option).
.
.It Ar file
File to read default note options from (default
.Pa ~/.xnotsrc ) .
This must appear immediately after the
.Ar dir
option.
.El
.Ed
.
.
.Sh NOTE FILE SYNTAX
.
.
.Bd -filled
The typical note file looks like this
.
. Bd -literal -offset 4n
* background	: #204040
* geometry	: 150x150-0+0

Super important memo goes here. <b>This will be bold</b>
.Ed
.
.Pp
.
The first few lines that have a
.Sq Sy *
in the first collumn are options that modify the appearance of the sticky note. Once a (non-blank) line is encountered without a
.Sq Sy *
in the first column, that line and everything following is treated as the text of the sticky note.
.
.Pp
.
The text of the sticky note can contain simple markup tags as supported by the
.Em pango
library. See the file
.Pa pango-Text-Attributes.html
that comes with the
.Em pango
documentation for a list and description of all markup tags supported. Keep in mind that even minor errors in your markup will cause the
.Em pango
library to complain verbosely, and not render any markup at all for your note. You can disable the use of markup in the note text using the
.Ic useMarkup
option.
.
.Pp
.
The following options can be used to control the appearance of your sticky notes. If these options appear in the configuration file
.Pa ~/.xnotsrc
then they apply to all notes. Otherwise they will only apply to the current note.
.Bl -tag -width 4n
.
.It Ic display Ar dpy
X display to connect to (this only works from the
.Pa ~/.xnotsrc
file)
.
.It Ic geometry Ar geom
The geometry of the note as understood by the
.Xr XParseGeometry 3X11
function.
.Nm
checks to see if the geometry of this note is saved in the file
.Pa .xnotsinfo .
If found, then this is used as the geometry of the note. If not, then
.Ar geom
is used as the geometry of the note.
.Pp
If the user resizes / moves the note, then the new geometry will be saved in the file
.Pa .xnotsinfo ,
so that the note can be restored to exactly the same position in future sessions. If you want the previously stored geometry information in
.Pa .xnotsinfo
to be ignored, then just delete the appropriate entry in
.Pa .xnotsinfo .
.Pp
.Sy NOTE :
The geometry of a note is stored along with the filename of the note. If the note file is deleted, then the geometry of the note is NOT forgotten. This is useful if you later create a note with the same filename, as it will appear on the desktop with the same geometry.
.
.It Ic foreground Ar color
The color of the note text.
.
.It Ic background Ar color
The color of the note background.
.
.It Ic alpha Ar degree
The transparency degree of the note. 0 is fully transparent, 255 is completely opaque. The note is made
.Sq root-transparent
and is tinted to the color specified by the
.Ic background
option with alpha
.Ar degree .
.Pp
The note can only be made root-transparent if you used an esetroot compatible program to set the desktop wallpaper. For instance
.Xr feh 1
or
.Xr fvwm-root 1
with the
.Fl r
option will do this. See also the comments about transparency in the man page of
.Xr mrxvt 1
since the transparency code is almost identical to mrxvt's transparency code.
.
.It Ic bypassWM Op Ar bool
If
.Ar bool
is true, then the OverrideRedirect flag is set when creating note windows. This means that window managers will completely ignore this window (not decorate it, not pass it focus put it in task bars or pagers). Also the X server generally preserves the contents of such windows, when you expose parts or all of your note window, you'll find that your sticky notes take less time to redraw themselves.
.Pp
When this option is unset,
.Nm
tries very hard to tell your window manager to make your sticky notes skip your pager / taskbar and appear undecorated on all desktops. However some window managers, like
.Xr fvwm 1 ,
do not honor all such requests. If you use fvwm for instance, and your sticky notes to not have window decorations then you can either set the
.Ic bypassWM 
option, or put the following line in your fvwm configuration file:
.Bd -literal -offset 4n
Style XNots NoTitle, !Borders, WindowListSkip
.Ed
.
.It Ic onTop Ar bool
If true your sticky notes are above other windows, instead of being below them.
.
.It Ic title Ar title
The window of your note window
.
.It Ic useMarkup Ar bool
If true, basic markup tags are accepted in the note text. See the file
.Pa pango-Text-Attributes.html
that comes with the
.Em pango
documentation for a list and description of all markup tags supported.
.
.It Ic font Ar fontname
The name of the Xft font to be used to render your sticky note text.
.
.It Ic size Ar size
The point size of the font to be used to render your sticky note text.
.
.It Ic leftMargin Ar margin
Left margin of note text
.
.It Ic rightMargin Ar margin
Right margin of note text
.
.It Ic topMargin Ar margin
Top margin of note text
.
.It Ic botMargin Ar margin
This works differently from the other margins. If non-zero, then the height of the note window is adjusted so that the note has exactly the specified margin at the bottom. If 0, then the height of the sticky note window is exactly as specified by the
.Ic geometry
option.
.
.It Ic indent Ar width
Set's the indentation of the first line of each paragraph. Hanging indents can be produced by setting this to a negative value. In this case the first tab stop will be exactly equal to the (absolute) value of the indent, so that the first tab character will skip the hanging indent.
.
.It Ic roundRadius Ar radius
If you want your note to have rounded corners, then set this option to the radius of the corners and
.Nm
will use the shape extension to shape the note window to be a rounded rectangle. If set to 0 your notes will be regular rectangles.
.El
.Ed
.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
.
.Bd -filled
See the files in the
.Pa examples/
subdirectory of the
.Nm
source archive.
.Ed
.
.
.Sh NOTES
.
.
.Bd -filled
.Bl -dash -compact -width 2
.
.It
You need a Linux kernel with inotify compiled with inotify support for
.Nm
to work. I think inotify is included by default with the Linux 2.6.13 upward, but I recommend using 2.6.16 and up.
.Pp
.
.It
Sometimes
.Nm
does not detect when the watched directory is deleted (but it generally detects when the watched directory is moved).
.El
.Ed
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.
.Bd -filled
.Bl -tag -width 4n
.It Pa ~/.xnotsrc
Default note options are read from this file on startup.
.It Pa ~/.xnots
Default directory to look for sticky note files.
.It Pa .xnotsinfo
File where all note geometries are stored.
.El
.Ed
.
.
.Sh BUGS
.
.
.Bd -filled
.Bl -dash -compact -width 2
.It
Deleting options from a displayed note does not reset to the default value. Maybe this is how it should be :)
.It
The
.Ic useMarkup
and
.Ic bypassWM
options work badly when changed for a already displayed note.
.El
.Ed
.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.
.Bd -filled
The pango text markup attributes
.Pa pango-Text-Attributes.html ,
.Xr inotify 7 .
.Pp
.Bd -centered
.Ad http://xnots.sourceforge.net
.Ed
.Ed
.
.
.Sh AUTHOR
.An "Gautam Iyer" < Ns Mt gi1242@users.sourceforge.net Ns >
